.ds q \N'34'
.TH WACOM 4 "@VERSION@" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
wacom \- Wacom input driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "Section \*qInputDevice\*q"
.BI "  Identifier \*q" idevname \*q
.B  "  Driver \*qwacom\*q"
.BI "  Option \*qDevice\*q   \*q" devpath \*q
\ \ ...
.B EndSection
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wacom
is an X input driver for Wacom devices.
.PP
The
.B wacom
driver functions as a pointer input device.
.SH SUPPORTED HARDWARE
This driver supports the Wacom IV and Wacom V protocols. Serial tablets only
need this driver.  USB tablet support is available on some Linux platforms
and requires the wacom kernel driver being loaded before this driver starts.
.PP
Please check https://github.com/linuxwacom for latest updates of Wacom X
and kernel drivers.
.SH DRIVER-INTERNAL DEVICE HOTPLUGGING
When input device hotplugging in the X server is enabled and no
.B InputDevice
section exists for a compatible tablet device and an
.B InputClass
section (see xorg.conf.d(5x)) assigns this driver for the device, the
.B wacom
driver creates multiple X devices for each a physical device, one X device
for each available tool. The list of tools is hardware-dependent. See
.B Option "Type"
as outlined in the
.B CONFIGURATION DETAILS
section.
.PP
These tool-specific devices are referred to as parent device and dependent
device.  The parent device is the one presented by the system and the one
that causes the X server to load the
.B wacom
driver. This parent device then causes the automatic addition of several
dependent devices. If the parent device is unplugged or otherwise removed,
the dependent devices will be automatically removed as well.
.PP
Dependent devices may be assigned tool-specific options through additional
.B InputClass
sections. We recommend that a
.B MatchDriver "wacom"
line is used in these sections in addition to the user-specific pattern.
.PP
Match directives are applied by the X server before the driver is selected.
The type name of the parent device is appended by the driver. It is not
possible to use a
.B MatchProduct
directive to match against this appended type name.
.SH CONFIGURATION DETAILS
Please refer to xorg.conf(5x) or xorg.conf.d(5x) for general configuration
details and for options that can be used with all input drivers.  This
section only covers configuration details specific to this driver.
.PP
Multiple instances of the Wacom devices can cohabit. Each device
supports the following entries:
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Type"\fP \fI"stylus"|"eraser"|"cursor"|"pad"|"touch"\fP
sets the type of tool the device represents. This option is mandatory.
The core options, such as "SendCoreEvents" or "AlwaysCore", are
unnecessary in Gimp if you don't need to move system cursor outside
of Gimp drawing area.  "pad" is for Intuos 3 or Cintiq 21UX tablet
ExpressKeys/menu strips, and Graphire 4 or Bamboo tablet buttons, wheel,
and/or ring.  It is required  for Intuos3,  CintiqV5, Graphire 4, and
Bamboo if you want to use keystroke features.  "pad" is reported as a
second tool in the driver. "touch" is for the tablet with touch support.
Right now only a few Tablet PCs have this feature.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Device"\fP \fI"path"\fP
sets the path to the special file which represents serial line where
the tablet is plugged.  You have to specify it for each subsection with
the same value if you want to have multiple devices with the same tablet.
This option is mandatory.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Suppress"\fP \fI"number"\fP
sets the position increment under which not to transmit coordinates.
This entry must be specified only in the first Wacom subsection if you have
multiple devices for one tablet. If you don't specify this entry, the default
value,  which is 2, will be used. To disable suppression, the entry should be
specified as 0.  When suppress is defined,  an event will be sent only when at
least one of the following conditions is met:

        the change between the current X coordinate and the previous one is
greater than suppress;

        the change between the current Y coordinate and the previous one is
greater than suppress;

        the change between the current pressure and the previous one is
greater than suppress;

        the change between the  current degree of rotation and the previous
one of the transducer is greater than suppress;

        the change between the current absolute wheel value and the previous
one is equal to or greater than suppress;

        the change between the current tilt value and the previous one is equal
to or greater than suppress (if tilt is supported);

        relative wheel value has changed;

        button value has changed;

        proximity has changed.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Mode"\fP \fI"Relative"|"Absolute"\fP
sets the mode of the device.  The default value for stylus, pad and
eraser is Absolute; cursor is Relative;
touch defaults to Relative for tablets with touch pads and Absolute for
touch screens.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"TopX"\fP \fI"number"\fP
X coordinate of the top corner of the active zone.  Default to 0.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"TopY"\fP \fI"number"\fP
Y coordinate of the top corner of the active zone.  Default to 0.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"BottomX"\fP \fI"number"\fP
X coordinate of the bottom corner of the active zone.  Default to width of the tablet.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"BottomY"\fP \fI"number"\fP
Y coordinate of the bottom corner of the active zone.  Default to height of the tablet.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"ButtonsOnly"\fP \fI"on"|"off"\fP
disables the device's motion events.  Default to off.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"ButtonM"\fP \fI"AC"\fP
reports an action AC when button M is pressed,  where M
is one of the device supported  button numbers,  it can be 1
to 32. Wacom uses a driver-internal button mapping, where any physical
button appears to the X server as the button specified by the ButtonM
mapping. Hence, if two physical buttons have the same ButtonM mapping, the
server will think they are the same physical button.
The default action reported to the X server is mouse button M click. Because
X uses buttons 4, 5, 6, and 7 as the four scrolling directions, physical
buttons 4 and higher are mapped to 8 and higher by default.
Only simple button presses can be configured here; for more complex
actions, use xsetwacom(1).
To ignore the button click, i.e., to not report any button click event
to the X server,  use "0" or "button 0".
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"TPCButton"\fP \fI"on"|"off"\fP
enables the stylus buttons as Tablet PC buttons. If enabled, the stylus
reports button events only when its tip is pressed. If any button is down,
pressing the tip reports a button event for the button. Otherwise if no
button is down, the tip reports as usual.
Default to "on" for Tablet PCs; "off" for all other models. Only available
on the stylus tool.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Touch"\fP \fI"on"|"off"\fP
enables touch events for touch devices,  i.e., system cursor moves when
user touches the tablet.  Default to "on" for devices that support touch;
"off" for all other models.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Rotate"\fP \fI"CW"|"CCW"|"HALF"|"NONE"\fP
rotates the tablet orientation counterclockwise (CCW) or clockwise (CW) or 180 degrees (HALF).
If you have specific tablet mappings, i.e. TopX/Y or BottomX/Y were set, the mapping will be
applied before rotation. Rotation must be applied to the parent device
(usually the stylus), rotation settings on in-driver hotplugged devices (see
.B DRIVER-INTERNAL DEVICE HOTPLUGGING
) will be ignored. The default is "NONE".
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"PressCurve"\fP \fI"x1,y1,x2,y2"\fP
sets pressure curve by control points x1, y1, x2, and y2.  Their values are in range
from 0..100. The pressure curve is interpreted as Bezier curve with 4
control points, the first and the last control point being fixed on the
coordinates 0/0 and 100/100, respectively. The middle control points are
adjustible by this setting and thus define the shape of the curve.
The input for linear curve (default) is "0,0,100,100";
slightly depressed curve (firmer) might be "5,0,100,95";
slightly raised curve (softer) might be "0,5,95,100".
The pressure curve is only applicable to devices of type stylus or eraser,
other devices do not honor this setting.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Pressure2K"\fP \fI"bool"\fP
reduces the pressure range to the range of 0 to 2048 for backwards
compatibility with applications that have this range hardcoded.
See section
.B BUGS.
This option should not be used unless the user runs one or more
applications that rely on a hardcoded pressure range.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"DebugLevel"\fP \fI"number"\fP
sets the level of debugging info for tool-specific messages.  There are 12
levels, specified by the integers between 1 and 12.  All debug messages with
a level less than or equal to the "number" will be logged into the Xorg log
file. This option is only available if the driver was built with debugging
support.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"CommonDBG"\fP \fI"number"\fP
sets the level of debugging info for common (i.e. not tool-specific) code
paths on the tablet. There are 12 levels, specified by the integers between
1 and 12. All debug messages with a level less than or equal to the
"number" will be logged into the Xorg log file. This option is only
available if the driver was built with debugging support.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"GrabDevice"\fP \fI"bool"\fP
sets whether the underlying event device will be grabbed by the driver to
prevent the data from leaking to /dev/input/mice. When enabled, while the
X server is running, no other programs will be able to read the event
stream.  Default: "false".
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"CursorProx"\fP \fI"number"\fP
sets the distance at which a relative tool is treated as being out of proximity.
Beyond this distance the cursor will stop responding to tool motion. The
default value for pucks is 10 (Intuos Pro) or 42 (Intuos/Bamboo). The default
value for pens is 30.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"RawSample"\fP \fI"number"\fP
Set  the  sample  window  size (a sliding average sampling window) for
incoming input tool raw data points.  Default:  4, range of 1 to 20.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Serial"\fP \fI"number"\fP
sets the serial number associated with the physical device. This allows
to have multiple devices of the same type (i.e. multiple pens). This
option is only available on wacom V devices (Intuos series and Cintiq 21U).
To see which serial number belongs to a device, you need to run the utility program,
xsetwacom, which comes with linuxwacom package.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"ToolSerials"\fP \fI"number[,type[,label]][;...]"\fP
sets the list of serial numbered devices that need to be hotplugged for a physical
device. The 'type' option may be any of "pen", "airbrush", "artpen", or "cursor".
This option is only available on wacom V devices which are capable of reporting a
serial number. To see if a connected device is supported, or to identify
which serial number belongs to a device, you need to run the utility program,
xsetwacom, that comes with this driver. In layman's terms, this option will add
additional X devices for this specific tool's tip (and eraser, if applicable).
This is useful for programs like gimp (which remembers tools based on the X device) to recall
additional drawing tool selections for an airbrush+eraser, art pen, extra pen, etc.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Threshold"\fP \fI"number"\fP
sets the pressure threshold used to generate a button 1 events of stylus.
The threshold applies to the normalised pressure range of [0..2048].
The default is 27.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"Gesture"\fP \fI"bool"\fP
Enable or disable multi-finger in-driver gesture support on the device. Default: off
unless the tablet supports multi-touch. Note that disabling this option may allow
the desktop environment to detect multi-finger gestures instead.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"ZoomDistance"\fP \fI"number"\fP
If
.B Option \fI"Gesture"\fP
is enabled, this option specifies the minimum movement distance before a
zoom gesture is recognized.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"ScrollDistance"\fP \fI"number"\fP
If
.B Option \fI"Gesture"\fP
is enabled, this option specifies the minimum movement distance before a
scroll gesture is recognized.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"TapTime"\fP \fI"number"\fP
If
.B Option \fI"Gesture"\fP
is enabled, this option determines the maximum time of a touch event to be
recognized as tap. A press and release event shorter than
.B TapTime
generates button press and release events. Presses longer than
.B TapTime
do not generate button events, only motion events.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"PressureRecalibration"\fP \fI"bool"\fP
Allows to disable pressure recalibration. Default: true.
If the initial pressure of a device is != 0 the driver recalibrates
the pressure range. This is to account for worn out devices.
The downside is that when the user hits the tablet very hard the
initial pressure reading may be unequal to zero even for a perfectly
good pen. If the consecutive pressure readings are not higher than
the initial pressure by a threshold no button event will be generated.
This option allows to disable the recalibration.
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"PanScrollThreshold"\fP \fI"number"\fP
Specifies the distance the pen must move (in tablet units) before a
scroll event is generated when using the "pan" action. Smaller values
will require less distance and be more sensitive. Larger values will
require more distance and be less sensitive.  Default: 1300 or 2600
depending on tablet resolution (corresponds to 13 mm of distance).
.TP 4
.B Option \fI"SmoothPanscrollingEnabled"\fP \fI"bool"\fP
Allows to disable smooth panscrolling. Default: true.
If disabled, panscrolling sends legacy button events instead.
This option exists for backwards compatibility with
applications that have the number of axes on a device limited to 6.
See section
.B BUGS
for more details. This option should not be used unless the user runs one or
more applications that do not support more than six axes.

.SH "TOUCH GESTURES"
.SS Single finger (1FG)
.LP
\fBLeft click:\fR
tap, actual click happens after TapTime period elapses.
.LP
\fBLeft click drag:\fR
tap to select, quickly (within TapTime period) touch selection again.  Then drag.
Available on touchpads, e.g. BambooPT, not touchscreens.
.PP
.SS Two finger (2FG)
.LP
\fBRight click:\fR
one finger down + tap second finger
.LP
\fBVertical scroll:\fR
two fingers side by side (in any orientation) moving vertically with constant
separation initiates a vertical scroll.  By driver default a gesture up results
in a scroll down event (the document moves up) and a gesture down results in a
scroll up event (moving the document down).
.LP
\fBHorizontal scroll:\fR
two fingers side by side held at a constant distance moving horizontally initiates
a horizontal scroll.  A gesture to the left results in a scroll right event (the
document moves left) and a gesture right results in a scroll left event (moving
the document right).
.LP
\fBZoom in:\fR
two separated fingers side by side, bring together i.e. pinch.
.LP
\fBZoom out:\fR
two fingers side by side, spread.  Not all applications support zoom.
.PP
.SH "BUGS"
.SS "Pressure range increase leads to unexpected behavior"
In version 0.34, the driver's pressure range increased from
2048 steps to 65536 steps. The pressure axis range is advertised through the
X Input Protocol but some applications have the previous pressure range
hardcoded and cannot handle pressure values above 2048. This is an
application bug but for backwards-compatibility with such applications, this
driver provides the
.B Pressure2K
option to reduce the range to 2048 steps. Note that this setting applies to
the device. Once applied, all applications will see the reduced pressure
range. It is not possible to provide this setting on a per-application
basis.
.SS "Smooth panscrolling exceeds the axis limits"
In version 1.2.0, the driver's support for smooth panscrolling added two axes
to the stylus device, bringing the total axis count to eight. The number of
axes is advertised through the X Input Protocol but some applications (notably
GIMP 2.xx) cannot handle more than six axes. This is an application bug but for
backwards-compatibility with such applications, this driver provides the
.B SmoothPanscrollingEnabled
option to disable this feature and thus limit the axis count to six. Note that
this setting applies to the device. Once applied, the driver will not send
smooth panscroll events at all. It is not possible to provide this setting on a
per-application basis.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
__xservername__(1), xorg.conf(5),
xorg.conf.d(5), X(7)
.PP
More information is available at https://github.com/linuxwacom/xf86-input-wacom
.SH AUTHORS
Peter Hutterer <peter.hutterer@who-t.net>,
Ping Cheng <pingc@wacom.com>,
Frederic Lepied <lepied@xfree86.org>,
John E. Joganic <jej@j-arkadia.com>,
Magnus Vigerlöf <Magnus.Vigerlof@ipbo.se>
